Initial "wireframe" for model contracts (#2890)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/collaborate/publish/model-contracts.md

---
title: "Model contracts"
id: model-contracts
sidebar_label: "Model contracts"
description: "Model contracts define a set of parameters validated during transformation"
---

:::info Beta functionality
This functionality is new in v1.5. These docs provide a high-level overview of what's to come. The specific syntax is liable to change.

For more details and to leave your feedback, join the GitHub discussion:
* ["Model contracts" (dbt-core#6726)](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/discussions/6726)
:::

## Related documentation
* [`contract`](resource-configs/contract)
* [`columns`](resource-properties/columns)
* [`constraints`](resource-properties/constraints)

## Why define a contract?

Defining a dbt model is as easy as writing a SQL `select` statement or a Python Data Frame transformation. Your query naturally produces a dataset with columns of names and types based on the columns you select and the transformations you apply.

> While this is ideal for quick and iterative development, for some models, constantly changing the shape of its returned dataset poses a risk when other people and processes are querying that model. It's better to define a set of upfront parameters about the shape of your model. We call this set of parameters a "contract." While building your model, dbt will verify that your model's transformation will produce a dataset matching up with its contract, or it will fail to build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this is ideal for quick and iterative development, for some models, constantly changing the shape of its returned dataset poses a risk when other people and processes are querying that model. It's better to define a set of upfront attestations that guarantee the shape of your model. We call this set of attestations a "contract." While building your model, dbt will verify that your model's transformation will produce a dataset matching up with its contract, or it will fail to build.
```

> While this is ideal for quick and iterative development, for some models, constantly changing the shape of its returned dataset poses a risk when other people and processes are querying that model. It's better to define a set of upfront attestations that guarantee the shape of your model. We call this set of attestations a "contract." While building your model, dbt will verify that your model's transformation will produce a dataset matching up with its contract, or it will fail to build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this is ideal for quick and iterative development, for some models, constantly changing the shape of its returned dataset poses a risk when other people and processes are querying that model. It's better to define a set of upfront "guarantees" that define the shape of your model. We call this set of guarantees a "contract." While building your model, dbt will verify that your model's transformation will produce a dataset matching up with its contract, or it will fail to build.
```

## How to define a contract

Let's say you have a model with a query like:

<File name="models/marts/dim_customers.sql">

```sql
-- lots of SQL

final as (

    select
        -- lots of columns
    from ...

)

select * from final
```
</File>

Your contract _must_ include every column's `name` and `data_type` (where `data_type` matches the type your data platform understands). If your model is materialized as `table` or `incremental`, you may optionally specify that certain columns must be `not_null` (containing zero null values). Depending on your data platform, you may also be able to define additional `constraints` enforced while the model is being built.

Finally, you configure your model with `contract: true`.

<File name="models/marts/customers.yml">

```yaml
models:
  - name: dim_customers
    config:
      contract: true
    columns:
      - name: customer_id
        data_type: int
        not_null: true
      - name: customer_name
        data_type: string
        ...
```

</File>

When building a model with a defined contract, dbt will do two things differently:

> 1. dbt will run a prerequisite check to ensure that the model's query will return a set of columns with names and data types matching the ones you have defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. dbt will run a preliminary verification check to ensure that the model's query will return a set of columns with names and data types matching the ones you have defined.
```

> 1. dbt will run a preliminary verification check to ensure that the model's query will return a set of columns with names and data types matching the ones you have defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. dbt will run a "preflight" check to ensure that the model's query will return a set of columns with names and data types matching the ones you have defined.
```
